Change vector index update limitations (it is now updatable) (#23326)
ydb-platform/ydb: ydb/docs/en/core/dev/vector-indexes.md

{% endnote %}

> ## Updating Vector Indexes {#update}
> 
> When a table with a vector index is updated, its internal structure — a tree of clusters (groups of similar vectors) — is not recalculated. New or modified records are simply assigned to existing clusters.
> 
> Over time, this can lead to index degradation and:
> 
> 1. Reduced completeness — the index may return a smaller number of relevant results because clusters no longer reflect the actual data structure.
> 2. Reduced performance — if clusters become unbalanced (for example, one cluster contains too many records), search queries slow down and may, in the worst case, scan the whole table.
> 
> The degradation depends on the nature of updates:
> 
> - If the index was built on a representative sample (e.g., a random 50% of the data) and the remaining records were added later, the structure remains relevant and degradation is minimal.
> - If entire groups of similar vectors were missing from the initial dataset, the clusters may not divide the space correctly, and relevance of the results may drop significantly.
> 
> The corner case is when the index is created on an empty table: in this case, it consists of only one cluster, and all new records are placed into it. Searches on such index are equivalent to full table scans.
> 
> To prevent degradation:
> 
> - Do not create a vector index on an empty table.
> - If the table has accumulated a large amount of new data, [build a new index](../yql/reference/syntax/alter_table/indexes.md) and [atomically replace](../reference/ydb-cli/commands/secondary_index.md?version=main#rename) the old index with the new one.

Reviewer: ````suggestion
## Updating Vector Indexes {#update}

When a table with a vector index is updated, its internal structure — a tree of clusters (groups of similar vectors) — is not recalculated. New or modified records are simply assigned to existing clusters.

Over time, this can lead to index degradation, resulting in:

1. Reduced completeness — the index may return fewer relevant results because clusters no longer reflect the actual data distribution.
2. Reduced performance — unbalanced clusters (for example, one cluster containing too many records) can slow down search queries and, in the worst case, lead to full table scans.

The extent of degradation depends on the nature of the updates:

- If the index was built on a representative sample (e.g., a random 50% of the data) and the remaining records are added later, the index structure remains mostly relevant, and degradation is minimal.
- If entire groups of similar vectors were absent from the initial dataset, the clustering may fail to partition the space effectively, leading to a significant drop in result relevance.

A particularly problematic corner case arises when a vector index is created on an empty table. In this scenario, the index consists of a single cluster, and all new records are placed within it. As a result, searches using such an index are equivalent to full table scans.

To prevent degradation:

- Avoid creating a vector index on an empty table.
- If a large volume of new data has been added, [build a new index](../yql/reference/syntax/alter_table/indexes.md) and [atomically replace](../reference/ydb-cli/commands/secondary_index.md#rename) the old index with the updated one.
````
